prayer.md, before:

---
title: Staff prayer meeting @ ZHAW
layout: page
comments: true
---

[<img alt="Thilo & Lasse" src="http://stdm.github.io/images/thilo-lasse-rheinfall.jpg"/>](http://stdm.github.io/images/thilo-lasse-rheinfall.jpg)


The staff prayer meeting at ZHAW takes place weekly in a hybrid setting [online on MS Teams](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3a29c1fc51c21e450baa2944cdf84edee8%40thread.tacv2/online%2520prayer%2520meeting?groupId=91902fe1-3c0c-4018-b6f0-8920beb9c168&tenantId=5d1a9f9d-201f-4a10-b983-451cf65cbc1e) and at the premises of the [Stadtmission Winterthur](http://www.stadtmission-winterthur.ch/) (entry from the rear side at Neumarkt). The corner room Technikumstrasse/Neumarkt on the ground floor usually hosts staff and faculty members from different departments and all Christian denominations. Over lunchtime, we sing, hear a passage from the Bible, and split into smaller groups to pray for each other's needs as well as for our university, colleagues and students. Occasionally, we go out to lunch together afterwards. The meetings are lead by [Josef Adam](https://www.zhaw.ch/en/about-us/person/adjo/).

**Fall term 2022 meetings: every week on Thursday noon (12:00-12:30) between Sep 01 and Jan 26 (Christmas holidays: Dec 29 / Jan 05).**

> For the eyes of the Lord range throughout the earth to strengthen those whose hearts are fully committed to him. 
2 Chronicles 16, 9

If you want to meet fellow Christian colleagues, be encouraged and prayed for, and make use of our privilege to ask God's blessing for our place of work, we cordially welcome you at any of our meetings. If you are in Zurich, you might be interested in the [Dozentenforum](http://www.dozentenforum.ch/) of colleagues form ETH and UZH. If you are a student, you might be interested in the [VBG Winterthur](http://winti.vbg.net/).

Commit message:

updated staff prayer meeting for spring 2023

prayer.md, after:

---
title: Staff prayer meeting @ ZHAW
layout: page
comments: true
---

[<img alt="Thilo & Lasse" src="http://stdm.github.io/images/thilo-lasse-rheinfall.jpg"/>](http://stdm.github.io/images/thilo-lasse-rheinfall.jpg)


The staff prayer meeting at ZHAW takes place weekly in a hybrid setting [online on MS Teams](https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3a29c1fc51c21e450baa2944cdf84edee8%40thread.tacv2/online%2520prayer%2520meeting?groupId=91902fe1-3c0c-4018-b6f0-8920beb9c168&tenantId=5d1a9f9d-201f-4a10-b983-451cf65cbc1e) and at the premises of the [Stadtmission Winterthur](http://www.stadtmission-winterthur.ch/) (entry from the rear side at Neumarkt). The corner room Technikumstrasse/Neumarkt on the ground floor usually hosts staff and faculty members from different departments and all Christian denominations. Over lunchtime, we sing, hear a passage from the Bible, and split into smaller groups to pray for each other's needs as well as for our university, colleagues and students. Occasionally, we go out to lunch together afterwards. The meetings are lead by [Josef Adam](https://www.zhaw.ch/en/about-us/person/adjo/).

**Spring term 2023 meetings: every week on Thursday noon (12:00-12:30) between Mar 09 and Jul 13.**

> So that there should be no division in the body, but that its parts should have equal concern for each other. If one part suffers, every part suffers with it; if one part is honored, every part rejoices with it. Now you are the body of Christ, and each one of you is a part of it.
1 Corinthians 12, 25-27

If you want to meet fellow Christian colleagues, be encouraged and prayed for, and make use of our privilege to ask God's blessing for our place of work, we cordially welcome you at any of our meetings. If you are in Zurich, you might be interested in the [Dozentenforum](http://www.dozentenforum.ch/) of colleagues form ETH and UZH. If you are a student, you might be interested in the [VBG Winterthur](http://winti.vbg.net/).
